6-consumer/lessons/3-spoken-feedback/virtual-device-text-to-speech.md, before:

# Text to speech - Virtual IoT device

In this part of the lesson, you will write code to convert text to speech using the speech service.

## Convert text to speech

The speech services SDK that you used in the last lesson to convert speech to text can be used to convert text back to speech. When requesting speech, you need to provide the voice to use as speech can be generated using a variety of different voices.

Each language supports a range of different voices, and you can get the list of supported voices for each language from the speech services SDK.

### Task - convert text to speech

1. Import the `SpeechSynthesizer` from the `azure.cognitiveservices.speech` package by adding it to the existing imports:

    ```python
    from azure.cognitiveservices.speech import SpeechConfig, SpeechRecognizer, SpeechSynthesizer
    ```

1. Above the `say` function, create a speech configuration to use with the speech synthesizer:

    ```python
    speech_config = SpeechConfig(subscription=api_key,
                                 region=location)
    speech_config.speech_synthesis_language = language
    speech_synthesizer = SpeechSynthesizer(speech_config=speech_config)
    ```

    This uses the same API key, location and language that was used by the recognizer.

1. Below this, add the following code to get a voice and set it on the speech config:

    ```python
    voices = speech_synthesizer.get_voices_async().get().voices
    first_voice = next(x for x in voices if x.locale.lower() == language.lower())
    speech_config.speech_synthesis_voice_name = first_voice.short_name
    ```

    This retrieves a list of all the available voices, then finds the first voice that matches the language that is being used.

    > 💁 You can get the full list of supported voices from the [Language and voice support documentation on Microsoft Docs](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/cognitive-services/speech-service/language-support?WT.mc_id=academic-17441-jabenn#text-to-speech). If you want to use a specific voice, then you can remove this function and hard code the voice to the voice name from this documentation. For example:
    >
    > ```python
    > speech_config.speech_synthesis_voice_name = 'hi-IN-SwaraNeural'
    > ```

1. Update the contents of the `say` function to generate SSML for the response:

    ```python
    ssml =  f'<speak version=\'1.0\' xml:lang=\'{language}\'>'
    ssml += f'<voice xml:lang=\'{language}\' name=\'{first_voice.short_name}\'>'
    ssml += text
    ssml += '</voice>'
    ssml += '</speak>'
    ```

1. Below this, stop the speech recognition, speak the SSML, then start the recognition again:

    ```python
    recognizer.stop_continuous_recognition()
    speech_synthesizer.speak_ssml(ssml)
    recognizer.start_continuous_recognition()
    ```

    The recognition is stopped whilst the text is spoken to avoid the announcement of the timer starting being detected, sent to LUIS and possibly interpreted as a request to set a new timer.

    > 💁 You can test this out by commenting out the lines to stop and restart the recognition. Set one timer, and you may find the announcement sets a new timer, which causes a new announcement, leading to a new timer, and so on for ever!

1. Run the app, and ensure the function app is also running. Set some timers, and you will hear a spoken response saying that your timer has been set, then another spoken response when the timer is complete.

> 💁 You can find this code in the [code-spoken-response/virtual-iot-device](code-spoken-response/virtual-iot-device) folder.

😀 Your timer program was a success!

Commit message:

Lesson 24 (#112)
* Adding content

* Update en.json

* Update README.md

* Update TRANSLATIONS.md

* Adding lesson tempolates

* Fixing code files with each others code in

* Update README.md

* Adding lesson 16

* Adding virtual camera

* Adding Wio Terminal camera capture

* Adding wio terminal code

* Adding SBC classification to lesson 16

* Adding challenge, review and assignment

* Adding images and using new Azure icons

* Update README.md

* Update iot-reference-architecture.png

* Adding structure for JulyOT links

* Removing icons

* Sketchnotes!

* Create lesson-1.png

* Starting on lesson 18

* Updated sketch

* Adding virtual distance sensor

* Adding Wio Terminal image classification

* Update README.md

* Adding structure for project 6 and wio terminal distance sensor

* Adding some of the smart timer stuff

* Updating sketchnotes

* Adding virtual device speech to text

* Adding chapter 21

* Language tweaks

* Lesson 22 stuff

* Update en.json

* Bumping seeed libraries

* Adding functions lab to lesson 22

* Almost done with LUIS

* Update README.md

* Reverting sunlight sensor change

Fixes #88

* Structure

* Adding speech to text lab for Pi

* Adding virtual device text to speech lab

* Finishing lesson 23

* Clarifying privacy

Fixes #99

* Update README.md

* Update hardware.md

* Update README.md

* Fixing some code samples that were wrong

* Adding more on translation

* Adding more on translator

* Update README.md

6-consumer/lessons/3-spoken-feedback/virtual-device-text-to-speech.md, after:

# Text to speech - Virtual IoT device

In this part of the lesson, you will write code to convert text to speech using the speech service.

## Convert text to speech

The speech services SDK that you used in the last lesson to convert speech to text can be used to convert text back to speech. When requesting speech, you need to provide the voice to use as speech can be generated using a variety of different voices.

Each language supports a range of different voices, and you can get the list of supported voices for each language from the speech services SDK.

### Task - convert text to speech

1. Open the `smart-timer` project in VS Code, and ensure the virtual environment is loaded in the terminal.

1. Import the `SpeechSynthesizer` from the `azure.cognitiveservices.speech` package by adding it to the existing imports:

    ```python
    from azure.cognitiveservices.speech import SpeechConfig, SpeechRecognizer, SpeechSynthesizer
    ```

1. Above the `say` function, create a speech configuration to use with the speech synthesizer:

    ```python
    speech_config = SpeechConfig(subscription=speech_api_key,
                                 region=location)
    speech_config.speech_synthesis_language = language
    speech_synthesizer = SpeechSynthesizer(speech_config=speech_config)
    ```

    This uses the same API key, location and language that was used by the recognizer.

1. Below this, add the following code to get a voice and set it on the speech config:

    ```python
    voices = speech_synthesizer.get_voices_async().get().voices
    first_voice = next(x for x in voices if x.locale.lower() == language.lower())
    speech_config.speech_synthesis_voice_name = first_voice.short_name
    ```

    This retrieves a list of all the available voices, then finds the first voice that matches the language that is being used.

    > 💁 You can get the full list of supported voices from the [Language and voice support documentation on Microsoft Docs](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/cognitive-services/speech-service/language-support?WT.mc_id=academic-17441-jabenn#text-to-speech). If you want to use a specific voice, then you can remove this function and hard code the voice to the voice name from this documentation. For example:
    >
    > ```python
    > speech_config.speech_synthesis_voice_name = 'hi-IN-SwaraNeural'
    > ```

1. Update the contents of the `say` function to generate SSML for the response:

    ```python
    ssml =  f'<speak version=\'1.0\' xml:lang=\'{language}\'>'
    ssml += f'<voice xml:lang=\'{language}\' name=\'{first_voice.short_name}\'>'
    ssml += text
    ssml += '</voice>'
    ssml += '</speak>'
    ```

1. Below this, stop the speech recognition, speak the SSML, then start the recognition again:

    ```python
    recognizer.stop_continuous_recognition()
    speech_synthesizer.speak_ssml(ssml)
    recognizer.start_continuous_recognition()
    ```

    The recognition is stopped whilst the text is spoken to avoid the announcement of the timer starting being detected, sent to LUIS and possibly interpreted as a request to set a new timer.

    > 💁 You can test this out by commenting out the lines to stop and restart the recognition. Set one timer, and you may find the announcement sets a new timer, which causes a new announcement, leading to a new timer, and so on for ever!

1. Run the app, and ensure the function app is also running. Set some timers, and you will hear a spoken response saying that your timer has been set, then another spoken response when the timer is complete.

> 💁 You can find this code in the [code-spoken-response/virtual-iot-device](code-spoken-response/virtual-iot-device) folder.

😀 Your timer program was a success!
